ITERATORS
---------

This document contains brief notes, summaries if you like, of core iterator concepts, it is 
not a full book on everything to do with iterators. For more information see the references.

The directory contains a set of individually compiler tests and experiments I made when playing
around with iterators. I keep them here since maybe they will be useful for me later.

BASIC CONCEPT
-------------

An iterator is a conceptual object type used to traverse the elements of a collection. The
idea is that all iterators use a common interface allowing any collection to be traversed in
a common way.

The C++ standard library implements iterators via the template duck typing system, thus the
iterator interface is more like an iterator specification that a type must conform to.

However the iterator specification is actually a specification for multiple types of iterators
each of which have different operations that can be performed on them as well as different
guarantees/properties regarding those operations.

Further there are utilities around iterators which make their use more convenient. All in all
the important concepts of iterators are:

  - iterator categories (types of iterator)
  - auxillary iterator functions
  - iterator adapters
  - iterator traits

briefly...

Iterator categories include: output iterators, input iterators, forward iterators, bidirectional
iterators, random access iterators and contiguous iterator. The last one there being a c++20
addition which is not covered in ref[0]...TODO: learn that one.

Auxillary functions are convenience functions for iterators to make a few use cases easier and
the code more elegant. They apparantly also provide functionality to some iterator categories
that normally only random access iterators have; need to look into that.

Iterator adaptors are types which modify (i.e. adapt) existing iterator categories to behave in
some usefully alternative manner. These include: reverse iterator adaptors, insert iterator
adaptors and stream iterator adaptors.

Iterator traits allow for inspection of type data regarding an iterator, the point of which is
to make it possible to write generic code for iterators. This is done via the template 
iterator_traits. Basically iterator traits is a struct template which defines the set of types
an iterator must define to be used by generic algorithms in the STL. It is a core part of the
iterator interface. This used to be done (deprecated in C++17) with std::iterator, see ref[1]
for why it was deprecated and why std::iterator_traits is better.

That is about all there is to know about iterators, excluding all the details of course :)

REFERENCES
----------
[0] The C++ Standard Library 2nd Edition by Nicolai M. Josuttis Chapter 9
[1] https://www.fluentcpp.com/2018/05/08/std-iterator-deprecated/
